Working Paper No. 244
Can Taxes and Bonds Finance Government Spending?
by
Stephanie Bell*
Cambridge University Visiting Scholar, The Jerome Levy Economics Institute
July 1998

* The author wishes to thank Peter Ho, John Henry, Edward Nell, and Randy Wray for helpful comments.
Remaining errors are mine.

The Levy Economics Institute Working Paper Collection presents research in progress by
Levy Institute scholars and conference participants. The purpose of the series is to
disseminate ideas to and elicit comments from academics and professionals.
Levy Economics Institute of Bard College, founded in 1986, is a nonprofit,
nonpartisan, independently funded research organization devoted to public service.
Through scholarship and economic research it generates viable, effective public policy
responses to important economic problems that profoundly affect the quality of life in
the United States and abroad.
Levy Economics Institute
P.O. Box 5000
Annandale-on-Hudson, NY 12504-5000
http://www.levyinstitute.org
Copyright © Levy Economics Institute 1998–2013 All rights reserved
ISSN 1547-366X

Abstract

This paper investigates the commonly held belief that government
spending is normally financed through a combination of taxes and
bond sales. The argument is a technical one and requires a detailed
analysis of reserve accounting at the central bank. After carefully
considering the complexities of reserve accounting, it is argued that
the proceeds from taxation and bond sales are technically incapable
of financing government spending and that modern governments
actually finance all of their spending through the direct creation of
high-powered money. The analysis carries significant implications for
fiscal as well as monetary policy.

1. INTRODUCTION
The optimal method by which to finance government
topic among many economists (see Modigliani,

(deficit) spending remains a controversial

1992; Trostel, 1993; Ludvigson,

1996; and Smith

et al., 1998). Although most would agree that government

financial policies require choosing

among the imposition of taxes, the sale of interest-bearing

debt obligations and the

‘printing’/creation
disagreement

of government

money’ (or some combination of these), there is often strong

regarding the macroeconomic

consequences

of these choices.

The Barro-Ricardo

thesis (Barro, 1974) for example, suggests that the financing choice is inconsequential.
argued, is because the knowledge that bond-financed

government

This, it is

spending will require higher

taxes in the future induces households to save more now. The induced saving, which is just
sufftcient to purchase the new government

debt, leaves private net wealth unchanged,

completely neutralizing the stimulative effect of government

spending.

thereby

Similarly, as Tobin

recognizes, spending financed by issuing demand obligations (i.e. ‘printing’ money) might lead a
monetarist Ricardian to suggest that a “money rain”, like a “bond rain”, will have no effect on
aggregate private wealth or consumption

since adjustments in the price level will prevent the real

quantity of money from changing (1998).

Thus, bond- or money-financed

deficit spending yields

results ‘equivalent’ with those that would have resulted if all spending had been financed by
contemporaneous

taxation.

In contrast, some Keynesians maintain that choices concerning the source(s) of deficit
finance are indeed relevant (Blinder and Solow, 1973, 1976; Buiter, 1977; Lerner, 1973; Tobin

’ Government money will be used to refer to high-powered money (HPM), defined as member
bank deposit balances at the Federal Reserve plus total currency outstanding. When necessary,
changes in the ‘money supply’ (Ml, M2, etc.) will be distinguished from changes in HPM.

-l-

1961). For them, the economic consequences

of borrowing and ‘printing’ money can differ

substantially from those obtained when government
contemporaneous

taxation.

spending is financed solely by

Among members of this group, most would probably agree that

‘printing’ money is both the least common and the least desirable method for financing the
government’s

spending.

Indeed, most would probably say that bond sales are (and should be)

used to finance the excess of spending over taxation.
Despite differing beliefs regarding the consequences of the financing decision, both groups
clearly believe that the government
conspicuously

does choose how to finance its spending.

absent in these ongoing debates, however, is a detailed examination of the nuances

of reserve accounting.

Because these nuances have not been incorporated

many economists continue to debate the macroeconomic
methods.

consequences

sales, and deficit spending.

into standard analyses,

of alternative “financing”

These debates follow directly from the apparent interdependence

interdependence

What is

among taxes, bond

By considering the impact of these operations on bank reserves, their

can be explained as a consequence

of their “reserve effects”, rather than as

necessary financing relationships.
Thus, this paper closely examines the “reserve effects” of the Treasury’s operations by
tracing through the impact of government
bank reserves.

spending, taxing and bond sales on aggregate member

Section 2 details the impact of government

spending and taxing on bank reserves

as well as the significance of the resulting reserve effects. In Section 3, some important strategies
for minimizing the reserve effects are introduced.

The case of deficit spending is taken up in

Section 4, where the reserve effects of various methods for the sale of government
examined.

debt are

In Section 5, the complexities of reserve accounting are caremlly considered,

-2-

and

newly-created

money is revealed as the source of all government

finance. It is further argued that

the proceeds from taxation and bond sales are not even capable of financing government
since their collection implies their destruction.

spending

In the concluding section, it is suggested that

debates concerning alternative methods for financing the government’s

(deficit) spending should,

instead, be debates about alternative means of draining (excess) reserves from the banking system.

2. THE “RESERVE EFFECTS” OF TAXING AND SPENDING
Before examining the “reserve effects” of various Treasury operations, it is, perhaps, prudent to
begin by looking closely at aggregate member bank reserves*. Beginning with the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet, equivalent terms can be added to each side, and the entries can be
manipulated algebraically in order to isolate member bank reserves3. The result, often referred to
as the ‘reserve equation’, depicts total member bank reserves as the difference between alternative
‘sources’ and ‘uses’ of reserve funds. The reserve equation can be written as:

2 Although reserve requirements are generally met by holding a combination of vault cash and
checking accounts at district Federal Reserve banks, accounts held by depository institutions at
Federal Home Loan Banks, the National Credit Union Administration Central Liquidity Facility,
or correspondent banks may also count toward satisfying the reserve requirement. Depository
institutions do not have to meet these reserve requirements on a daily basis. They have a twoweek “reserve period” (ending on Wednesdays) within which they must maintain average daily
total reserves equal to the required percentage of average daily transactions accounts held during
the two-week period ending the preceding Monday. Thus, despite being referred to as a
contemporaneous reserve accounting (CRA) system, it is, in practice, lagged for two days. That
is, banks always have two days (Tuesday and Wednesday) within which to acquire (expost)
reserves needed to eliminate a known deficiency. While some banks may choose to hold excess
reserves, profit-maximizing banks will economize on reserves. Unless a bank has a preference for
idle funds, it will exchange excess reserves for “earning assets” such as loans or securities.
3 See (Ranlett, 1977, pp. 19 l- 193) for the derivation.

-3-

Figure 1
Sources

I lses
-

-

Total
Member Bank
Reserves

=

Currency In Circulation
+
U. S. Treasury Balance at F

Federal Reserve Credit
U.S. Gov’t Securities
Loans to Member Bai
Float
+
Gold
+
SDR Certificates
+
Treasury Currency
-

-

-

Foreign Balances at Fed
+
Treasury Cash
+
Other Fed Deposits and
accounts (net)

-

From Figure 1, it is clear that an increase in any of the bracketed terms on the left will increase
reserves while an increase in any of the bracketed terms on the right will reduce them.

2. I “‘Reserve Effects ” of Taxing and Spending
In this section, the reserve effects of two important Treasury operations, government

spending

and taxing, will be analyzed.

To emphasize the impact of these operations on bank reserves, the

case in which aJ government

payments and receipts are immediately credited/debited

to accounts

held at Reserve Banks will be considered4.
When the government

spends, it writes a check on its account at the Federal Reserve.

Assuming the check is deposited into an account at a commercial bank, member bank reserves rise
(by the amount of the check) as the Federal Reserve debits the Treasury’s account, decreasing the
right-hand bracket (RHB) in Figure 1, and credits the account of a commercial bank. Thus, a
system-wide increase in member bank reserves results whenever a check drawn on a Treasury

’ It is, of course, true that the Treasury keeps accounts at thousands of commercial banks and
other depository institutions as well as Federal Reserve banks. This changes things considerably
and will be taken up in the next section.
-4-

account at a Federal Reserve bank is deposited with a commercial bank. Government
then, increases aggregate bank reserves (ce~is

spending,

yaribus).

When, instead of &awirzg on its account at the Fed, the Treasury receives funds into this
account, the reverse is true. For example, if a taxpayer pays his taxes by sending a check to the
IRS, his bank and the banking system as a whole, lose an equivalent amount of reserves, as the
IRS deposits the check into the Treasury’s account at the Federal Reserve.
reserves decline as the RIB in Figure 1 increases,

Total member bank

Thus, the payment of taxes by check results in

a system-wide decrease in member bank reserves (ceterisparibus)5.
If Treasury spending out of its accounts at Federal Reserve banks were perfectly
coordinated

with tax receipts deposited directly into the Treasury’s accounts at Reserve banks,

their opposing effects on reserves would offset one another.
balanced budget with daily tax receipts and government
there would be no & effect on bank reserves.
receipts and disbursements

That is, if the government

ran a

spending timed to offset one another,

However, as Figure 2 shows, the Treasury’s daily

from accounts at Reserve banks are highly incommensurate.

Indeed,

they can differ by almost $6 billion.

’ It is worth noting that government spending must originally have preceded taxation. That is, the
payment of taxes could not increase the Treasury’s account at the Fed (RI-B term), reducing bank
reserves, until the reserves had been created. Moreover, the Federal Reserve and/or Treasury, as
the only agents capable of supplying them, must have been the original source of these reserves.
This will be taken up in Section 5.
-5-

Figure 2

77

Daily Flows Into/From Federal Reserve Accounts , March 1998
(net of transfers to/from T&L Accounts and debt management)

Series1
_ _ - - _ - Series2

Source:

Daily Treasury Statement, http://fedbbs.access,gpo.gov/dailys.htm

Thus, despite an attenuation of the “reserve effect” due to the simultaneous
withdrawal of reserves, government

injection and

spending and taxation will never perfectly offset one another,

Even if a more even pattern could be established, some discrepancies would persist because, as
Irving Auerbach recognized, “‘there is no way to determine in advance, with complete accuracy,
the total amount of the receipts or the speed at which the revenue collectors will be able to
process the returns” (1963, p. 349). Thus, while concurrent

government

spending and taxation

have sume offsetting impact on reserves, the reserve effect from the Treasury’s daily cash
operations would still be substantial, especially “if they were channeled immediately through the
Treasurer’s balance at the Reserve Banks” (Auerbach,

1963, p. 333).

2.2 The Importance of the “Reserve Effect ”
The inability to perfectly coordinate Treasury receipts and expenditures
for the level of bank reserves and, subsequently,

the money market.

has serious implications

Because banks are required

by law to hold reserves against some fraction of their deposits but earn no interest on reserves
held in excess of this amount, they will normally prefer not to hold substantial excess reserves.

-6-

Government

spending, then, will leave them with more reserves than they prefer/need to hold

while the clearing of tax payments will leave them with fewer reserves than are desired/required
(ceterisparibus).
The fed fi_mds market is the “market of first resort” for banks wishing to rid themselves of
excess reserves or to acquire reserves needed to meet deficiencies (Poole, 1987, p. 10). When
there is a build-up of reserves within the system, many banks will attempt to lend reserves in the
federal Cmds market.

The problem, of course, is that lending reserves in the funds market cannot

help a banking system, which began with an ‘equilibrium’ level of reserves, to rid itself of excess
reserves.

Moreover, when the system is f-lush with excess reserves, banks will find that there are

no bidders for these funds, and the federal funds rate may fall to a zero percent bid.
Likewise, the clearing of tax payments will leave a banking system which began with an
‘equilibrium’ level of reserves short of required (and/or desired) reserves.

Banks will look to the

funds market to acquire needed reserves, but since all banks cannot return to an equilibrium
reserve position by borrowing federal funds, a system-wide shortage will persist.

That is, like a

system-wide surplus, a system-wide deficiency cannot be alleviated through the fi_mds market6;
attempts to do so will simply drive the &nds rate higher and higher.
Importantly,

the fi_mds rate is not the only interest rate affected by changes in the level of

’ When there is a reserve deficiency for the banking system as a whole, banks could attempt to
resolve the deficiency by reducing deposits. If a single bank begins this process (selling U.S.
securities to a member of the non-bank public or allowing loans to be repaid without reissuing
them), it will result in a multiple contraction of deposits (assuming all banks follow suit). Though
this would ultimately eliminate the banking system’s reserve deficiency (without requiring banks
to acquire additional reserves), the process takes time and will disrupt interest rates until
‘equilibrium’ is restored. Deficiencies will, therefore, usually be eliminated as the banking system
acquires more reserves, not as it reduces deposits that reserves are required to ‘back up’.
-7-

bank reserves

As the “focus of monetary policy”, the funds rate is the “anchor for all other

interest rates” (Poole, 1987, p. 11). Thus, when banks are content with their reserve positions,
Treasury operations (such as government

spending and taxation) disrupt these positions by adding

or draining reserves, and banks react to these changes by first turning to the funds market.
the funds rate is bid up or down and other short-term interest rates are affected.

Although some

individual banks will be successful in eliminating their own reserve deficiencies/excesses,
banking system us a wholewill not be able to alleviate a shortage/deficiency
through government

adding/draining

There,

the

on its own. Only

of reserves can a system-wide imbalance be eliminated.

Because attempts to resolve system-wide reserve ‘disequilibrium’ through the funds market can
affect a number of other interest rates, a variety of procedures

have been developed to mitigate

the adverse impact of Treasury operations on banks’ reserve positions.

3. STRATEGIES

FOR REDUCING

THE “RESERVE EFFECT”

In the preceding discussion, the effects of government
examined by assuming that all disbursements

spending and taxing on bank reserves were

and receipts were immediately credited/debited

to

the Treasury’s accounts at Federal Reserve banks. This treatment allowed us to highlight the
impact of each of these operations on the level of bank reserves, but it did not paint a realistic
picture of the way things currently work.

If things did indeed work this way, there would be an

unrelenting disruption of banks’ reserve positions and, subsequently,
market.

Because these consequences

chronic turmoil in the funds

are highly undesirable from a policy perspective,

important strategies have been developed to mitigate these persistent, yet unpredictable,
effects”.

Let us move to an examination of these techniques,

-8-

some
“reserve

3. I The Use of Tmc and Loan Accounts
The disruptive nature of the Treasury’s operations was recognized under the Independent
Treasury System’ and ultimately led to the use of General and Special Depositories8, private
banks in which government

funds could be kept. This was the first important strategy developed

to mitigate the “reserve effect”. As Ranlett recognized, the reserve effect caused by the “point
inflow-continuous
government

outflow nature of Treasury activities” could be tempered by placing certain

receipts into Tax and Loan (T&L) accounts at private depositories

(1977, p. 226).

Thus, the reserve drain that would otherwise accompany payments made to the government
be temporarily preventedg.

The benefits of using these depositories

were quickly recognized,

could
and

their functions were broadened whenever it became clear that they could be used to further
mitigate the reserve effect. As the size of the government’s
Depositories

fiscal operations grew, Special

quickly became the most important group of bank depositories

As Figure 3 shows,

just over two-thirds of all Federal tax receipts are currently deposited directly into T&L accounts.

’ The Independent Treasury System was in effect long before the establishment of the Federal
Reserve System. It was established in 1840, abolished the following year, re-established in 1846,
and discontinued in 192 1.
’ General Depositories have become known as “remittance-option
banks” while Special
Depositories are currently referred to as “note-option banks”. Both are depository institutions
with T&L Accounts, but a “remittance-option bank”, like its predecessor, the General Depository,
must remit its T&L balances to a Reserve bank the day after the f%nds are received. In 1978,
“note-option banks” were given the opportunity to accumulate the daily tax payments they receive
by transferring them from the ordinary T&L Accounts (where they are held interest-free for one
day) into an interest-bearing “note account”. Up to a pre-approved limit, these funds can remain
in “note accounts” until the Treasury “calls” for them to be transferred to Reserve Banks
(Manypenny and Bermudez, 1992, p, 728).
’ In this case, a distinction between the ‘supply of money’ and HPM should be made. When tax
receipts are placed into a T&L account, HPM (bank reserves and currency outstanding) is not
affected. The ‘money supply’ (Ml), however, is. When funds are transferred from demand
deposits, where they are part of Ml, into T&L accounts (or the Treasury’s account at the Fed),
which is not part of any standard measure of the money supply (Ml, M2, etc.), the ‘money
supply’ declines.

Figure 3
Disposition

of Federal Tax Deposits

Other
2%

(Nov. ‘97- Mar. ‘98)

Federal Reserve
Account (Direct)
13%
Remittance Option
Depositaries
18%

Tax and Loan Note
Accounts
67%

Source:

Daily Treasury Statement, http://fedbbs.access.gpo.gov/dailys.htm

Today, the T&L accounts are by far the most important device used to guard the money market
against the sizable daily differences (shown in Figure 2) between the flows of government

receipts

and disbursements.

3.2 Managing the Treasury ‘s Balance at the Fed
Since almost all government

spending involves writing checks on accounts at the Fed, virtually all

funds in T&L accounts must eventually be transferred to Reserve banks”.

Because only net

changes in the Treasury’s account at the Fed impact the aggregate level of reserves (ceteris
paribzq), maintaining “the Treasurer’s balance with the Reserve Banks at a reasonably constant
level” is the second strategy used to minimize the “reserve effect” of the Treasury’s operations
(ibid., p. 364). Specifically, the Treasury “aims to maintain a closing balance of $5 billion in its
Federal Reserve checking accounts each day” (Manypenny, et. al, 1992, p. 728). Figure 4 shows
how successful the Treasury is in its endeavor to maintain its target closing balance.

lo This is not because the government needs the proceeds from taxation in order to spend again,
but because it chooses to coordinate its taxing and spending. This will be taken up in the final
section.
-lO-

Figure 4
Daily Closing Balance In Treasury’s Account at the
Federal Reserve (Nov. ‘97 - Mar. ‘98)

Source:

Daily Treasury Statement, http://fedbbs.access.gpo.gov/dailys.htm

Recall that the government

receives funds into its accounts at the twelve Reserve banks as well as

thousands of commercial banks each day but that nearly all government

spending is done by

writing checks on accounts at Reserve banks. Maintaining a closing balance of $5 billion at
Reserve banks, then, usually requires transferring the appropriate

amount from T&L accounts to

the Treasury’s account at the Fed. For example, if the Treasury expected to receive $5 billion
directly into accounts at Reserve banks (today) and expected $6 billion in previously-issued
checks to be presented for payment (today), $1 billion wiii need to be transferred to the
Treasury’s account at the Fed (today) so that there will be no net change in the level of reserves.
The Treasury transfers funds to cover anticipated shortfalls by making a “call” on T&L
accounts.

In most cases, advance notice is given before transferring funds from these accounts”.

rr Special Depositories (or note-option banks) fall into three categories: A banks, B banks and C
banks. A and B banks are typically smaller institutions, while depositories that are classified as C
banks are generally large banks. T&L calls are calculated as fractions of the book balance in each
T&L account on the previous day. “Calls” made on A and B banks are usually made with longer
lead times than calls made on C banks, and the latter are usually the only banks against which
same-day or next day calls may be issued.
-ll-

A “reverse-call” or “direct investment” is also possible.

This would be necessary if the Treasury’s

closing balance at Reserve banks was expected to substantially exceed $5 billion12. To avoid the
reserve drain that would result from an excessive closing balance, the Treasury may place some or
all of the excessive funds into T&L accounts at note-option

banks13. Whether “calling” funds

,fiom T&L’s to make up for an expected shortfall or transferring funds to T&L’s through direct
investment (or canceling previous calls) to prevent an excessive closing balance, the amounts
transferred are intended to maintain the Treasury’s balance at Reserve banks as steady as possible.
In pursuit of this goal, the Treasury relies on the cooperation

3.3 Coordination

of the Federal Reserve.

With The Federal Reserve

The Federal Reserve is extremely interested in helping the Treasury achieve its target closing
balance because the Treasury’s balance at the Fed is “often the biggest source of uncertainty
about reserve levels” (Meulendyke,

1989, p. 159). Indeed, the Fed’s ability to successfully

conduct monetary policy (specifically, to hit its target h_mds rate) depends, to a large extent, on
the Treasury’s ability to hit its target closing balance. Daily contact between the Treasury and the

l2 The closing balance in the Treasury’s account at the Fed could exceed the target level for two
reasons. First, previously placed T&L calls may have been too large. In this case, the amount of
spending from accounts at Reserve banks is less than the sum of the payments received directly
into accounts at the Fed and the amounts “called” from T&L’s Second, it is possible that the
payments made to the government and deposited directly into accounts at Reserve banks exceed
the amount presented for payment from these accounts. This could happen, for example, during
months in which quarterly tax payments sent directly to accounts at the Fed are large enough to
more than compensate for government spending.
I3 The Treasury will not, in all instances, be successful in its attempt to directly invest its excess
Curds. Some note-option banks will not meet the collateral requirements and will be ineligible
recipients of additional T&L funds. Additionally, T&L accounts, like the Treasury’s account at
the Fed, may swell during unusually heavy quarterly tax payments. Because banks must pay
interest on T&L accounts, they limit the size of T&L balances they are willing to accept. When
direct investment is not an option, the Treasury can attempt to cancel previously scheduled calls in
an attempt to draw down its balance in Reserve banks.
-12-

Fed provide the Treasury with “numerous occasions
achieve a desired objective” (Auerbach,
Unfortunately,

to assist the Reserve authorities to

1963, p. 328).

the Treasury is unable, even with the cooperation

of the Federal Reserve,

to completely offset the effects of its daily spending using T&L calls and direct investment.
Indeed, as Table 1 shows, the Treasury’s average monthly closing balance can differ substantially
from its $5 billion target.

Table 1
Month

Source:

Average Closing Balance ($Millions)

November 1997
December 1997
January 1998
February 1998
March 1998

5,015
5,371
6,563
5,118
5,763

5-month Average

5,618

Daily Treasury Statement, http://fedbbs.access.gpo.gov/dailys.htm

This, again, is the result of the inherent uncertainty regarding the size/timing of receipts and
expenditures.

That is, because the payments coming into/going out of the Treasury’s account at

the Fed can never be precisely known in advance, transfers to/from T&L accounts will not
normally offset (exactly) the shortfall/excess

in these accounts.

Thus, as Figure 5 confirms, one

expects a non-zero change in the Treasury’s daily closing balance. Despite this, changes in the
daily closing balance do tend to fluctuate fairly closely around zero, deviating most drastically
with quarterly tax payments.

-13-

Figure 5
Change in Daily Closing Balance (Nov. ‘97 - Mar. ‘98)

Source:

Daily Treasury Statement, http://fedbbs.access.gpo.gov/dailys.htm

In sum, three important points have been made regarding the Treasury’s operations.

First,

the Treasury recognized the disruptive nature of its cash operations and responded by maintaining
accounts at private depositories.

Second, the Treasury uses these accounts to diminish the

reserve effect of its operations by using T&L calls and direct investments to minimize the net
changes in Reserve account balances (to coordinate the flow of its receipts with its expenditures).
Finally, the Treasury and the Fed cooperate to bring about a fairly high degree of harmony in
managing the Treasury’s balances at Reserve banks

4. SELLING BONDS TO COORDINATE

THE TREASURY’S

OPERATIONS

So far we have addressed only the Treasury’s attempts to balance its taxing and spending flows in
order to minimize the reserve effect of its operations.
the notion that the government
if the government

Implicit in our discussion, therefore, was

attempts to balance its budget.

What if it doesn’t?

That is, what

runs a budget deficit? How does the sale of bonds affect the Treasury’s cash

flow operations and, subsequently, the reserve effect? There are three scenarios that must be

-14-

analyzed in order to determine the reserve effect of selling bonds, the key being by whom and
how are they purchased
First, it must be recognized that T&L accounts actually receive not only proceeds from tax
payments, but also funds from the sale of government

debt, When commercial banks with T&L

accounts (or customers of these banks) purchase government

bonds, there may be no immediate

loss of reserves to the purchasing bank or the banking system,

If, when the Treasury auctions

new debt, it specifies that at least some portion of the bonds are eligible for purchase by credit to
T&L accounts, Special Depositories
the U.S. Treasury).
issued bond?.

may acquire the bonds by crediting deposits (in the name of

These depositories,

therefore, will not lose reserves as they purchase newly-

Similarly, the purchase of newly-issued government

Special Depository,

debt by a customer of a

as long as the Treasury specifies that some (or all) of the offering is eligible

for purchase by T&L credit, will leave reserves unaffected.
Special Depository purchases government

For example, when a customer of a

securities, the Treasury redeposits the check into the

bank on which the check was drawn. The bank then credits the Treasury’s T&L account,
offsetting the debit to the buyer’s account.

Thus, like the purchase of government

Special Depository,

debt to a customer of one of these institutions can be

the sale of government

debt by a

effected without any loss of reserves.
The second method concerns the private purchase of newly-issued government
does not involve crediting a T&L account.

When the securities are ineligible for purchase by

T&L credit, and/or are not purchased by a so-called “note-option”
the purchase of government

debt that

bank (or one of its customers),

bonds will immediately drain reserves from both the bank and the

I4 The reader might wonder whether additional reserves are required as a result of the larger T&L
balance. The answer is no. Since the establishment of interest-bearing note accounts in November
1978, Special Depositories have been free of reserve requirements against T&L deposits.
-15

banking system.

This is because the proceeds from the sale of the securities will not stay “in the

system” but will be deposited directly into one of the Treasury’s accounts at a Federal Reserve
bank. When bonds are sold in this way, member bank reserves decline as the Federal Reserve
credits the Treasury’s account, increasing the RHB in Figure 1. Thus, a bank wishing to purchase
U.S. government

securities, when T&L credit is not an option, will do so by drawing on its

account at the Federal Reserve. A system-wide loss of reserves will, therefore, accompany every
private purchase of newly-issued government

debt not eligible for payment through T&L credit.

Finally, the sale of Treasury securities to the Federal Reserve must be considered.

If the

Fed purchases newly-issued bonds directly from the Treasury, it will not cause a change in
member bank reserves.

This, as Figure 1 makes clear, is because both the RHB (U.S. Treasury

Balance at Fed ) and the LHB (U.S. Government
leaving total reserves unaffected.
considered on a consolihted

Furthermore,

Securities ) increase by the same amount,
since the government’s

balance sheet can be

basis, given by the sum of the Treasury’s and Federal Reserve’s

balance sheets with offsetting assets and liabilities simply canceling one another out (Tobin,
1998) the sale of bonds by the Treasury to the Fed is simply an internal accounting operation,
providing the government

with a self-constructed

spendable balance. Although self-imposed

constraints may prevent the Treasury from creating all of its deposits in this way, there is no real
limit on its ability to do so15,
Now, the Treasury clearly has choices regarding the manner in which newly-issued bonds
will be sold. For example, if the government p1au.s to engage in deficit spending, the Treasury can
sell bonds, allow them to be purchased by T&L credit, and thereby eliminate any immediate

l5 The Federal Reserve was, for a time, prohibited from purchasing bonds directly from the
Treasury. This changed during WWII, when the Fed was authorized to purchase up to $5 billion
Since then, the limit has been raised several times.
of securities directly from the Treasury
-16-

impact on reserve?.

When the Treasury sells bonds in this way, the bonds act as a sort of

ex ante coordination

tool. Since the Treasury can control the size and timing of hmds transferred

from T&L accounts, this type of bond sale helps the Treasury to drain (more-or-less)

the same

number of reserves from the system that are being added to the system as a result of its deficit
spending17.
If, however, there is a problem with the coordination
underestimate

(for example if the Treasury and Fed

the amount of checks that are drawn on the Treasury’s account at the

Fed), bonds could be sold in order to drain exce.s.s reserves.

In other words, insufficient T&L calls

(which result in a system-wide increase in reserves and threaten to send the overnight lending rate
to a zero percent bid) could prompt the sale of bonds as an expost coordination

tool. In order to

immediately drain the excess reserves, banks could not be allowed to purchase the bonds by
crediting a T&L account, but this is something the Treasury can specify (or something the Fed
can do).

5. THE NUANCES OF RESERVE ACCOUNTING
The purpose of this section is twofold.
used to finance government

First, the commonly-held

spending will be examined.

belief that taxes and bonds are

First, the question will be addressed

intuitively, drawing on the reserve effects analyzed in Sections 2-4. Second, for those who
remain unconvinced

by the intuitive analysis, the question as to whether the proceeds from taxes

and bond sales are even capable of financing government

spending will be considered.

The

I6 Boulding notes that deficit spending most commonly involves this practice (1966).
17Note that the government can deficit spend without taxing or selling bonds first but that if
government spending is greater than taxation, the banking system will be left with excess reserves.
The Treasury, therefore, prefers to use bonds to coordinate its deficit spending, selling them to
Special Depositories (and allowing T&L credit) before spending from its accounts at Reserve
banks. The bonds, then, allow the government to defend (ex ante) the fed funds rate.
-17-

argument requires an application of basic accounting principles to an analysis of reserve
accounting in order to determine whether revenues from taxation and the sale of bonds are even
capable of financing government

spending.

Both questions seems absurd.

There is surely no doubt that the proceeds from taxation

and bond sales are deposited into accounts held by the U.S. Treasury (either with commercial
banks or at the Federal Reserve) and that the government
accounts at Reserve banks. Moreover,

spends by writing checks on Treasury

since funds are transferred from T&L accounts to the

Treasury’s account at the Fed in order to cover anticipated shortfalls in these accounts, it certainly
looks as though the government

uses these proceeds to finance its spending.

interdependence

the basis for the treatment of taxation and bond sales as

is, undoubtedly,

financing operations.

But is the coordination

This apparent

of taxation and bond sales with (deficit) spending

due to necessity or does it mask a more pragmatic operation?
Let us consider the argument that the coordination
government

owes itself to necessity; that is, that the

needs to tax or borrow from the private sector in order to finance its spending.

question can be approached

The

pragmatically, using the following important conclusions drawn in

Sections 2-4:
1. The payment of taxes and the purchase of bonds by the private sector drain reserves from the

banking system as the proceeds are placed into the Treasury’s account at the Federal Reserve.
2. Government

spending causes a system-wide increase in aggregate bank reserves.

3. Changes in the total level of bank reserves cause changes in the federal funds and other shortterm interest rates.

-18-

4. The Treasury manages its closing balance in Reserve accounts by coordinating

its spending,

taxing and bond sales.
5. Barring self-imposed constraints, the Treasury could manufacture

all of its spending balances

by selling bonds directly to the Federal Reserve.

But why should the government

need to take from the private sector the money (currency and/or

bank reserves) that it alone is capable of creating?

It seems reasonable to suggest that it is not

money but bridges, armies, satellites, etc. that the government
encouraging

wants and that it acquires them by

the population to provide them in exchange for government

cannot be the government

money.

That is, it

but the public/citizens who need the money in order to settle their tax

liabilities to the state.
Indeed, the entire process of taxing and spending must, as a matter of logic, have begun
with the government
a population

first creating (and spending) new government

had made its money available? In other words, the government’s
money mustfirst

purchase of goods and services

have supplied the citizens with the means with which to pay

taxes. Thus, taxes can be conceived as the means by which the government
from private to public domain.
the government’s

directs real resources

If this theory is accepted, taxes are used to create a demand for

money, not to “finance” the government’s

spending.

Similarly, bonds need not be issued in order to allow the government
current taxation.

How, after all, could

money (I-PM) before the government

settle its tax liabilities using the government’s

using newly-created

money.

This, again, is because the government

balance internally (on its consolidated

to spend in excess of

can always create its own spendable

balance sheet) by offsetting a Treasury liability against a

-19-

Federal Reserve asset (e.g., but not necessarily, a Treasury bond).

In the absence of bond sales,

deficit spending would result in a net increase in aggregate bank reserves.

Bonds, then, are used

to coordinate deficit spending, draining what would otherwise become excess reserves.
provide the private sector with an interest-earning
currency and allow the government

alternative to non-interest-bearing

They

government

to spend in excess of taxation while maintaining positive

overnight lending rates.
Thus, an intuitive analysis of Treasury operations suggests a practical motivation for the
coordination

of taxation and bond sales with government

spending.

Specifically, because of the

reserve effects of taxing, spending, and selling bonds, the government

chooses to coordinate these

operations in order to mitigate the impact on banks’ reserve positions and, hence, on short-term
interest rates. This interdependence,
and bonds.
government’s

then, is not de,facto evidence of a “financing” role for taxes

On the contrary, taxes can be viewed as a means of creating a demand for the
money, HPM. Bonds, which are used to prevent deficit spending from flooding the

system with excess reserves, allow the maintenance of positive overnight lending rates. Neither
taxes nor bond sales, therefore, need be viewed as a financing operation.
Many readers will undoubtedly

remain unconvinced,

based on the intuitive analysis just

presented, that the treatment of taxation and bond sales as financing operations should be
discontinued.

Fortunately,

there is another, more powerful, method by which to argue that

taxation and bond sales should not be considered financing operations,
technical one and requires an understanding

The argument is a

that Federal Reserve notes (and reserves) are booked

as liabilities on the Fed’s balance sheet and that these liabilities are extinguished/discharged
they are offered in payment to the State. It must also be recognized that when currency or

-2o-

when

reserves return to the State, the liabilities of the State are reduced and high-powered

money is

destroyed.
The destruction of these promises is no different from the private destruction

of a promise

once it has been fulfilled. In other words, when an individual takes out a loan, she issues a
promise to a bank. Once she ‘makes good’ on that promise (i.e. repays the loan), she may
‘destroy’ that loan debt (liability) by eliminating it from her balance sheet. Likewise, the State,
once it fulfills its promise to accept its own money (HPM) at State pay-offices, can eliminate an
equivalent number of these liabilities from its balance sheet.
Thus, while bank money (Ml) is destroyed when demand deposits are used to pay taxes,
the government’s

money, HPM, is destroyed as the funds are placed into the Treasury’s account

at the Fed. Viewed this way, it can be convincingly argued that the money collected from taxation
and bond sales cannot possibly finance the government’s

spending.

This is because in order to

‘get its hands on’ the proceeds from taxation and bond sales, the government
money it has collected.

Clearly, government

must destroy the

spending cannot be financed by money that is

destroyed when received in payment to the State!
How, if not by using the money received in payment of taxes and bond sales, does the
government

finance its spending?

Notice that the government

writes checks on an account that

does not comprise part of the money supply or HPM but that as it does, the funds become part of
the money supply (Ml if deposited into checking accounts, M2 if savings accounts, etc.) and part
of HPM. It is therefore apparent that while the payment of taxes destroys an equivalent amount
of money (Ml immediately and HPM as the proceeds go into the Treasury’s account at the Fed),
spending from this account creates an equivalent amount of new money - both bank money and

-21-

HPM. Modern governments,
(high-powered)

then, finance all of their spending through the direct creation of new

money.

6. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
If the government

(Fed and Treasury) had no regard for the “reserve effect” of its operations,

would have little use for T&L accounts.
consolidated

it

It could simply create its own spendable deposit (on its

balance sheet) and then spend (adding reserves and creating money) without regard

for the size/timing of its tax receipts.

But this behavior would frequently leave a banking system

which was previously satisfied with its reserve position with substantially more excess reserves
than it wished to maintain,

A system flush with excess reserves would find few bidders for these

funds, and the overnight lending rate would fall toward zero. Taxes, as they drifted in, would
drain a portion of the excess reserves.

Still, the funds rate could remain at a zero percent bid for a

prolonged period of time.
In order to move to a positive funds rate, either the Federal Reserve or the Treasury
would be forced to sell bonds to drain excess reserves18. Banks, not wishing to hold an excessive
amount of non-interest-bearing
interest-earning

government

reserves for interest-bearing

money, would be all-too-happy
Treasury bonds.

to exchange non-

The bonds would have to be sold

until enough excess reserves had been drained to yield a positive (target) mnds rate. Although
this process of adding and later draining reserves could work, it would involve substantial
variation in the level of reserves and, subsequently,

significant turmoil in the market for federal

l8 Note that bonds would have to be sold even if the government ran an annually balanced
budget. This is because it is impossible to eliminate the “reserve effects” of the Treasury’s daily
operations. Thus, swings in the Treasury’s daily closing balance, which threaten to move the
fi.mds rate away from its target, would induce the sale of bonds despite an annually balanced
budget.
-22-

funds

Knowing that these are the undesirable effects of disregarding the reserve effects of its

operations, the Treasury chooses to coordinate its operations, transferring funds from T&L
accounts (draining reserves) as it spends from its account at the Fed.
Taxes are not necessary for, or even capable of, financing government
are paid using high-powered
the government

spending when they

money (i.e. by cash or check in a fiat money system).

In order for

to ‘get its hands on’ the proceeds from taxation, it must place these funds into the

Treasury’s account at the Fed. As it does, the banking system loses an equivalent amount of
desired and/or required reserves (either immediately or as the Treasury transfers the proceeds
from T&L accounts into its accounts at Reserve banks), and an equivalent amount of HPM is
destroyed.

Similarly, reserves are drained and HPM is destroyed when the Treasury issues bonds

(immediately if T&L credit is not allowed or with a lag as the proceeds are transferred from T&L
accounts).

In contrast, government

spending from the Treasury’s account at the Fed injects

reserves and creates an equivalent amount of new money (Ml, M2, etc. and HPM).
It is impossible to perfectly balance (in timing and amount) the government’s
its expenditures.

receipts with

The best the Treasury and the Fed can do is to compare estimates of anticipated

changes in the Treasury’s account at the Fed and to transfer approximately
to/from T&L accounts.

the correct amount

Errors due to excessive or insufficient T&L “calls” are the norm.

Although “same-day calls” and “direct investments”

are designed to permit the authorities to react

to these errors, they are not always an option.
When the Treasury is unable to correct these errors on its own, the Federal Reserve may
have to offset changes in the Treasury’s closing balance.

This will be necessary whenever the

errors are large enough to move the funds rate away from its target rate. In fact, as argued

-23-

previously, the Treasury’s balance at the Fed is “often the biggest source of uncertainty”
monetary policy-makers

(Meulendyke,

forced upon it by its commitment

faced by

1989, p. 159). Its role as an offsetting agency is essentially

to a target funds rate. Indeed, Poole (1975) goes further,

stating that the Fed will usually abandon any other objective target in order to maintain the funds
rate within its tolerance range. The adding/draining

of reserves, then, is largely non-discretionary,

as monetary policy is concerned primarily with maintaining the overnight lending rate. Fiscal
policy, in contrast, has to do with determining the supply of high-powered

money.

Moreover,

while both taxation and bond sales drain reserves from the banking system, neither provide the
government

with money with which to finance its spending.

lead (ultimately) to the destruction

Indeed, both taxation and bond sales

of HPM.

An analysis of reserve accounting reveals that all government

spending is financed by the

direct creation of HPM; bond sales and taxation are merely alternative means by which to drain
reserves/destroy

HPM. The choice, then, is between alternative methods for draining reserves in

order to prevent the overnight lending rate from falling to zero. In light of these findings, it is,
perhaps, time to reconsider our definitions of monetary and fiscal policy as well as our treatment
of taxation and bond sales as “financing” operations.

-24-

Auerbach, Irving, 1963, United States Treasury Cash Balances And The Control Of Member
Bank Reserves, Fiscal and Debt Management
Credit (Englewood

Policies: The Commission

on Money and

Cliffs: Prentice-Hall).

Barro, Robert J., 1974, Are Government

Bonds Net Wealth?, Journal of Political Economy 82(6),

1095-l 117.
Blinder, Alan S. and Robert M. Solow, 1973, Does Fiscal Policy Matter, Journal of Public
Economics 2, 3 18-37.
Blinder, Alan S. and Robert M. Solow, 1976, Does Fiscal Policy Still Matter?, Journal of Public
Economics

5, 501-10.

Boulding, Kenneth, 1966, Economic Analysis: Macroeconomics,

Vo1.2, Fourth Edition (New

York: Harper & Row).
Buiter, William H., 1977, Crowding Out and the Effectiveness
Economics
Ludvigson,

of Fiscal Policy, Journal of Public

7, 309-28.

Sydney, 1996, The Macroeconomic

Growth Model,

Effects of Government

Debt in a Stochastic

Journal of Monetary Economics 38(l), 25-45.

Lerner, Abba P., 1973, Money, Debt and Wealth, in W. Sellekaerts, ed., Econometrics
Economic Theory:

and

Essays in Honor of Jan Tinbergen

Manypenny, Gerald D. and Michael L. Bermudez,
Agents and Depositories

1992, The Federal Reserve Banks as Fiscal

of the United States, Federal Reserve Bulletin 78(10), 727-737.

Modigliani, France, 196 1, Long-Run Implications of Alternative Fiscal Policies and the
Burden of the National Debt, Economic Journal 7 1, 73 O-55.

Poole, William, 1975, The Making of Monetary Policy: Description and Analysis, Economic
Inquiry 13, 253-65.
Poole, William, 1989, Federal Funds Rate, in: John Eatwell, Murray Milgate, and Peter Newman,
eds., The New Palgrave: Money (New York and London: W. W. Norton) 1O-l 1.
Ranlett, John, 1977, Money And Banking: An Introduction

to Analysis and Policy, Third edition,

(Santa Barbara: John Wiley & Sons).
Smith, Bruce D. and Anne P. Villamil, 1998, Government
Randomly Determined Returns:
of Deficit Finance,

Borrowing Using Bonds With

Welfare Improving Randomization

In The Context

Journal of Monetary Economics 4 l(2), 3 5 l-3 70.

Tobin, James, 196 1, Money, Capital and Other Stores of Value, American Economic Review
51(2), 26-37.
Tobin, James and Stephen S. Golub, 1998, Money, Credit, And Capital (Boston: Irwin
McGraw-Hill).
Trostel, Phillip. A., 1993, The Nonequivalence
Journal of Monetary Economics
U.S. Department

Between Deficits and Distortionary

Taxation,

3 l(2), 207-227.

of the Treasury, 1997, 1998, Daily Treasury Statements (Superintendent

Documents,

U.S. Government

Printing Office), http://fedbbs.access.gpo.gov/dailys.htm.

of

-

